>> Steve Kinney: So we spend a lot of time
talking about all the things you can do
and ways you could do stuff.
We didn't really get super far into it,
like how does any of that work?
Right?
Which is the thing that we kind of need
to do before we can like fine tune a model
to bend it to our whim is now we know
the things you can do with the model.
That's neat.
We hand wavy.
I think we know how they work.
Let's actually get into how they work and
then we can weaponize that for
our own nefarious purposes.
So there's kind of two things
we need to talk about.
One is this idea of tokenization.
And then we'll get into encoding and
decoding and then attention.
A lot of these models that we
see today in the current AI hype
cycle are based on this paper
that came out of Google in 2017,
2018, around then called
attention is all you need and
introduces this idea of Transformers,
right?
So we are going to start
with tokenization and
we'll get all the way through
attention and Transformers.
We'll do a little playing around some
other notebooks to explore this stuff, but
we'll get that conceptual framework and
then we will weaponize that in order to
figure out how to fine tune a model to
do the thing that we want to do, right?
Because as I said earlier, and I will say
like three more times in the next hour,
sometimes a really big model that's
a general purpose thing that can do almost
anything is really good.
Sometimes a tiny little lightweight,
low resource model that you
can fine tune super easily.
Because the bigger the model,
the harder it is to fine tune it, right?
So the smaller the model,
the easier it is to kind of tune.
And we'll look at even
ways to better tune it.
But first we need to understand how all
these things work under the hood of all
the things we just saw, so
that we can then leverage that.
So the first of those topics that we'll
talk about is this idea of tokenization.
You've definitely probably at this point
heard the word token at some point.
And basically tokenization is a process
of taking some big wad of text and
breaking it up into smaller pieces, right?
And that's not always just words, right?
Because sometimes,
we can break it into pieces.
Like if you look at the word can't, right?
There's kind of two pieces to
the word can't, can and not, right?
And that right part is like, well, yeah,
that kind of works with isn't too,
doesn't it or wasn't, and
a lot of other words.
So like, in those cases,
you break those kind of terms
up into maybe two tokens, right?
Or a lot of, you know,
tokenization, for instance, right?
Token and
then ization might be two different.
So to say that, like,
a token is a word is, in a lot of cases,
true, but not always, right?
And it all depends a lot
of times on the model and
the tokenizer and stuff along those lines.
Because different models will
choose to do stuff differently.
Like common words that maybe appear all
the time, even if it fell into one of
those categories that we just said would,
might actually still be one token.
The answer, it depends.
But the idea is that we take these things,
we break them up into these tokens.
These tokens have numeric representations,
right?
And then we do math to find out how
they're related to each other in
multidimensional space.
And you're like, I'm a liberal arts major.
Me too.
So don't worry about it.
It'll be fine.
And so the process of tokenization is
we break down text into smaller words,
subwords, sub.
Sometimes a character, right?
And then we kind of convert each one
of them into some kind of number.
We have some special tokens which might
be the start or end of a sentence,
other meaningful things.
In the case of something like a chat, one
that's trained for chat, like the tokens
that separate the assistant from
the user from the system prompt,
there are special tokens you don't ever
see, but they are in there to kind of
draw invisible lines of demarcation
between sections, right?
And then we also then figure out
various different ways to find
out the importance of various words.
Cuz a lot of ways this is gonna work,
not to ruin some of the surprise for
you, is it's about any given word and
its relation to words around it, right?
And there's some words that we probably
that are very related to other words,
like the word the that shows
up around a lot of words.
A lot of words have
relationships to the word.
The not particularly
important relationships.
Sometimes maybe, but not always.
And so then we do various different
things to try to figure out, one,
what is the relationship of that word
to the other words in the sentence?
And then two,
how strong are those relationships?
And then given those relationships,
what could that word mean?
And I will use this on a later slide, but
one of the examples is the concept of
going down to the banks of the Mississippi
river versus robbing a bunch
of banks tomorrow, right?
Same word.
Context matters, right?
And we as humans just have brains
that happen to do that, right?
Computers don't.
So we had to figure out
how to teach them to.
And that's effectively the higher level
concept that we're going to talk about.
Like I said,
there are various different tokenizers.
You do not need to memorize this.
There will not be a quiz on it later.
Just to say, for some of these, for some
of the ones we saw earlier in our journey
together, they have how many vocabulary is
how many tokens does it know about, right?
And then how does it do it?
It's not really on
a practical day to day basis.
All you kind of need to know is
that they're different, right?
They have different vocabularies.
And obviously GPT2, you can just imagine
has a smaller vocabulary than GPT4, right?
And all those things matter
to a certain extent, but
not necessarily in our day to day usage.
Just knowing that one, that you might
see differences across the different
models and have to change your
approach is totally true.
Does it affect your day to day life?
Most days it does not.
Cool, so then we split things in tokens.
In this case for whatever library,
possibly a tokenized method,
you can treat it as pseudocode at this
point which will take a given word and
split it into these tokens.
So tokenization might,
I think this one is GPTs.
I think it's GPT2's.
If I'm doing this from memory
from when I made the slides,
is how that would break apart
tokenization into two words.
And you can kind of see that there is at
least a little bit of a hint that one of
these is a suffix, right?
I'll let you guess which
one is the suffix.
But you can kind of break and
then you can figure out.
Cuz token, you don't wanna just figure
out tokenization's relationship to
other words.
Right.
Sometimes.
What does token mean?
Like swimming and swim.
You want to definitely like swim
is probably important context for
the other words around.
You don't want to have different ways
of swimming than you want to have for
swim versus for swam.
Swam would technically be it's own token.
But whatever.
Like the idea is that you break
them apart so they are meaningful.
So a token is effectively,
you know, a piece of a word.
What is the heuristic that if you're
just trying to guess how many tokens
something is.
It's like 0.75 the number of characters.
That's just a heuristic.
That's not true.
But it's like not as many Characters
are in it because there are small words,
there are big words, some words will get
broken up into two, so on and so forth.
So it's a close enough representation.
The point is we break apart words,
we turn them into numbers, and
we have these special tokens.
So then when we encode them is when the
process of taking those tokens that then
map to a number and
like the same word will always map
to effectively the same number.
And we have these special tokens.
Is it the same word or the same token?
Same token.
Good catch.
Absolutely.
Same token, not the same word,
will map to the same ID at this point,
these special ones have known IDs
classification token is at
the beginning of a sequence.
Separator token is to
separate the segments,
two different sentences, we'll have
a separator in between them as well.
These start to give it
a sense of that shape and
the ability to figure out where to
stop and end and how this stuff works.
In the case of something like a overly
simplified version of if you're building
your own chatgpt kind of like model, there
will be those special ones that will say,
okay, here's the beginning
of the assistant message,
end of the assistant message, beginning
of the user message, so on and so forth.
Things that kind of act as lines of
demarcation between the tokens or
tokens in and of themselves, right?
But it all becomes a set of numbers.
So for instance,
you might see something like hello world.
Obviously you go to encode it and
you will end up with the IDs
of all of those tokens.
If you then were to go decode it,
you lose a little bit of meaning.
So obviously you lose the capitalization.
Because we don't think that hello means in
some cases, depending on the vocabulary,
certain things, all caps do mean something
different than the lowercase version.
But generally speaking,
right, we break it apart and
we will have first of all the addition
of the special characters.
But then like, you know, and
the comma and the exclamation
point are also tokenized as well.
And we break it apart and we kind of can
see if we take a given string of text,
encode it, and then immediately decode it,
like we gain some stuff,
we lose some stuff along the way, right?
But that's effectively kind of showing,
like how this process will
normalize a bunch of those words.
So encoding turns into numbers.
You can take a lucky
guess what decoding does.
Decoding is able to then turn it
back into a string because sure,
your prompt goes in, it gets turned
into a bunch of numbers stuff happens
to figure out what the next set of
tokens should be in terms of numbers.
But if you just Type
something into ChatGPT and
you got back a bunch of numbers, you'd be
like, well, I'm never using this again.
So then there is the process of
putting it back together and
that is the decoding process.
And different models
will use it differently.
You can imagine that the ones that
are looking forward and backwards
will engage with this differently than the
ones that are only looking backwards and
trying to generate the way forward.
Is this where model watermarking for
outputs happens too,
when they're decoding to print a screen?
Basically.
Are those proprietary libraries or
are those published as well?
Depends if it's an open source model or
not, right?
Insofar that I know
that obviously GPT2 is.
I think GPT3 had a model card and
then at some point they became less
OpenAI became less open about AI.
So in this case you can
take a series of tokens and
you decode it back in the token id.
No surprises here.